README.md, before:

# IoT Agent

A generalized IoT agent designed to be modular, configurable, supporting a variety of services, and designed to run on any Unix-based system. You can use [IOT-Cloud](https://github.com/BenMeehan/iot-cloud) or build your own MQTT backend.

Pre-Alpha Discussions: [Here](https://github.com/BenMeehan/iot-agent/discussions/6)

## Running the Project

To run the project, use:
```sh
go run cmd/agent/main.go
```
## TODO:
1. Auth Service
2. Easier Cross-Compilation for different architectures

## Architecture
![arch.png](./.github/images/agent-arch.png)

## Adding a New Service

1. **Update Configuration**:
   - Add necessary configurations in `config/config.yaml`.

2. **Create Service Logic**:
   - Add a new file in `internal/services` (e.g., `new_service.go`).
   - Implement the service logic similar to existing services (e.g., `heartbeat_service.go`).

## Services Overview

### Registration Service

- **Purpose**: Handles the registration of IoT devices with the server.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish registration messages.
  - `DeviceSecretFile`: Path to the file containing device secrets.
  - `ClientID`: The unique client identifier used for MQTT communication.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
- **Behavior**: Publishes registration data to the MQTT broker to register the device. If the `device.json` file contains a `deviceID`, then the device is already registered, and we use that. Otherwise, we do a secure registration through a PSK hash for authentication.

### Heartbeat Service

- **Purpose**: Periodically sends heartbeat messages to indicate the device is active.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish heartbeat messages.
  - `Interval`: Interval in seconds between heartbeat messages.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
- **Behavior**: Sends heartbeat messages at regular intervals to the MQTT broker to indicate that the device is still operational.

### Metrics Service

- **Purpose**: Collects and sends system and process metrics from the IoT device to a backend for monitoring and analysis.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish metrics data.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `Interval`: The interval in seconds to collect metrics (if applicable).
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
- **Behavior**: Collects metrics such as CPU usage, memory, disk space, and network usage, along with specific process metrics. The service publishes this data to the configured MQTT broker at regular intervals or upon changes. Metrics are configurable through a JSON file.

### Command Service

- **Purpose**: Executes commands on the IoT device and publishes the output to the MQTT broker.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish command execution results.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `OutputSizeLimit`: Maximum size of the output from the executed command in bytes.
  - `MaxExecutionTime`: Maximum time allowed for command execution (in seconds).
  - `Enabled`: A flag to enable or disable the command service.
- **Behavior**: Subscribes to a specified topic for commands, executes them on the device, and publishes the output to the MQTT broker. The command execution respects the output size limit and execution time constraints.

### Geolocation Service

- **Purpose**: Retrieves and publishes the geographical location of the IoT device using either GPS or network-based geolocation methods (e.g., Google Maps API).
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish location messages.
  - `Interval`: The interval in seconds for retrieving and publishing the location.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `UseGoogleGeolocation`: A boolean flag indicating whether to use Google Geolocation API or local GPS.
  - `APIKey`: The API key for accessing Google Geolocation services (required if `UseGoogleGeolocation` is true).
  - `GPSDevicePath`: The path to the GPS device (if using local GPS).
  - `GPSBaudRate`: The baud rate for the GPS device communication (if applicable).
- **Behavior**: 
  - Periodically retrieves the device's location and publishes it to the configured MQTT topic.
  - If `UseGoogleGeolocation` is true, it gathers WiFi access points and cell tower information to determine the location using the Google Maps API. 
  - If using local GPS, it reads location data from the specified GPS device.

### SSH Service

- **Purpose**: Establishes a secure reverse SSH connection to the IoT device, allowing remote access and control.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish SSH connection requests and status updates.
  - `BackendHost`: The hostname or IP address of the remote SSH server.
  - `BackendPort`: The port number of the remote SSH server.
  - `SSHUser`: The username used for SSH authentication.
  - `PrivateKeyPath`: Path to the SSH private key file used for authentication.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
- **Behavior**: 
  - Listens for incoming SSH connection requests via MQTT.
  - Establishes a reverse SSH tunnel, forwarding specified local ports to the remote server.
  - Handles incoming connections on the specified ports and forwards traffic between local and remote services.

### Update Service

- **Purpose**: Handles the update of IoT device software or firmware by downloading and applying new versions from the backend.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish update notifications and status messages.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `UpdateURL`: The URL to fetch the update package.
  - `UpdateInterval`: Interval in seconds between checking for updates.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `MaxRetryAttempts`: Maximum number of retry attempts if an update fails.
  - `UpdateCommand`: The command to execute after the update is downloaded (e.g., rebooting the device).
- **Behavior**:
  - Receives updates through MQTT in `UpdateURL`.
  - Downloads the update package and verifies its integrity.
  - Applies the update using the configured `UpdateCommand` and publishes the status to the MQTT broker.
  - Retries the update process a configurable number of times if it fails.

## Rules

1. **Naming Conventions**:
   - Use camel case for variables and constants (e.g., `deviceId`, `maxRetries`).
   - Use snake case for file names and folder names (e.g., `heartbeat_service.go`, `internal/services`).

2. **Code Style**:
   - Ensure code readability with clear, concise naming and consistent formatting.
   - Include meaningful comments where necessary but avoid over-commenting. Comments should explain why something is done, not just what is done.

3. **Logging**:
   - Use structured logging with a clear message and relevant context.
   - Ensure logs are informative and useful for debugging purposes.

## URLs

- [EMQX Public MQTT5 Broker](https://www.emqx.com/en/mqtt/public-mqtt5-broker)
- [MQTT Test Client](https://testclient-cloud.mqtt.cool/)

Commit message:

added documentation for registration service

README.md, after:

# IoT Agent

A generalized IoT agent designed to be modular, configurable, supporting a variety of services, and designed to run on any Unix-based system. You can use [IOT-Cloud](https://github.com/BenMeehan/iot-cloud) or build your own MQTT backend.

Pre-Alpha Discussions: [Here](https://github.com/BenMeehan/iot-agent/discussions/6)

## Running the Project

To run the project, use:
```sh
go run cmd/agent/main.go
```
## TODO:
1. Auth Service
2. Easier Cross-Compilation for different architectures

## Architecture
![arch.png](./.github/images/agent-arch.png)

## Adding a New Service

1. **Update Configuration**:
   - Add necessary configurations in `config/config.yaml`.

2. **Create Service Logic**:
   - Add a new file in `internal/services` (e.g., `new_service.go`).
   - Implement the service logic similar to existing services (e.g., `heartbeat_service.go`).

## Services Overview

```
Check the /docs directory for detailed documentation of the services
```

### Registration Service

- **Purpose**: Handles secure device registration via MQTT, supporting initial registration, re-registration, and JWT-based authentication.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: MQTT topic for registration requests.
  - `ClientID`: Unique device identifier.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `MaxBackoffSeconds`: Maximum retry interval for exponential backoff.
- **Behavior**:
  - If registered, validates the JWT token.
  - If unregistered or JWT is invalid, sends a secure registration request.
  - Encrypts payloads and subscribes to `PubTopic/response/{DeviceID}` for confirmation.
  - Implements exponential backoff with jitter for retries.
  - Saves the `DeviceID` and JWT token upon successful registration.

### Heartbeat Service

- **Purpose**: Periodically sends heartbeat messages to indicate the device is active.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish heartbeat messages.
  - `Interval`: Interval in seconds between heartbeat messages.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
- **Behavior**: Sends heartbeat messages at regular intervals to the MQTT broker to indicate that the device is still operational.

### Metrics Service

- **Purpose**: Collects and sends system and process metrics from the IoT device to a backend for monitoring and analysis.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish metrics data.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `Interval`: The interval in seconds to collect metrics (if applicable).
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
- **Behavior**: Collects metrics such as CPU usage, memory, disk space, and network usage, along with specific process metrics. The service publishes this data to the configured MQTT broker at regular intervals or upon changes. Metrics are configurable through a JSON file.

### Command Service

- **Purpose**: Executes commands on the IoT device and publishes the output to the MQTT broker.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish command execution results.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `OutputSizeLimit`: Maximum size of the output from the executed command in bytes.
  - `MaxExecutionTime`: Maximum time allowed for command execution (in seconds).
  - `Enabled`: A flag to enable or disable the command service.
- **Behavior**: Subscribes to a specified topic for commands, executes them on the device, and publishes the output to the MQTT broker. The command execution respects the output size limit and execution time constraints.

### Geolocation Service

- **Purpose**: Retrieves and publishes the geographical location of the IoT device using either GPS or network-based geolocation methods (e.g., Google Maps API).
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish location messages.
  - `Interval`: The interval in seconds for retrieving and publishing the location.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `UseGoogleGeolocation`: A boolean flag indicating whether to use Google Geolocation API or local GPS.
  - `APIKey`: The API key for accessing Google Geolocation services (required if `UseGoogleGeolocation` is true).
  - `GPSDevicePath`: The path to the GPS device (if using local GPS).
  - `GPSBaudRate`: The baud rate for the GPS device communication (if applicable).
- **Behavior**: 
  - Periodically retrieves the device's location and publishes it to the configured MQTT topic.
  - If `UseGoogleGeolocation` is true, it gathers WiFi access points and cell tower information to determine the location using the Google Maps API. 
  - If using local GPS, it reads location data from the specified GPS device.

### SSH Service

- **Purpose**: Establishes a secure reverse SSH connection to the IoT device, allowing remote access and control.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish SSH connection requests and status updates.
  - `BackendHost`: The hostname or IP address of the remote SSH server.
  - `BackendPort`: The port number of the remote SSH server.
  - `SSHUser`: The username used for SSH authentication.
  - `PrivateKeyPath`: Path to the SSH private key file used for authentication.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
- **Behavior**: 
  - Listens for incoming SSH connection requests via MQTT.
  - Establishes a reverse SSH tunnel, forwarding specified local ports to the remote server.
  - Handles incoming connections on the specified ports and forwards traffic between local and remote services.

### Update Service

- **Purpose**: Handles the update of IoT device software or firmware by downloading and applying new versions from the backend.
- **Configuration Parameters**:
  - `PubTopic`: The MQTT topic to publish update notifications and status messages.
  - `DeviceID`: The unique identifier for the device.
  - `UpdateURL`: The URL to fetch the update package.
  - `UpdateInterval`: Interval in seconds between checking for updates.
  - `QOS`: Quality of Service level for MQTT messages.
  - `MaxRetryAttempts`: Maximum number of retry attempts if an update fails.
  - `UpdateCommand`: The command to execute after the update is downloaded (e.g., rebooting the device).
- **Behavior**:
  - Receives updates through MQTT in `UpdateURL`.
  - Downloads the update package and verifies its integrity.
  - Applies the update using the configured `UpdateCommand` and publishes the status to the MQTT broker.
  - Retries the update process a configurable number of times if it fails.

## Rules

1. **Naming Conventions**:
   - Use camel case for variables and constants (e.g., `deviceId`, `maxRetries`).
   - Use snake case for file names and folder names (e.g., `heartbeat_service.go`, `internal/services`).

2. **Code Style**:
   - Ensure code readability with clear, concise naming and consistent formatting.
   - Include meaningful comments where necessary but avoid over-commenting. Comments should explain why something is done, not just what is done.

3. **Logging**:
   - Use structured logging with a clear message and relevant context.
   - Ensure logs are informative and useful for debugging purposes.

## URLs

- [EMQX Public MQTT5 Broker](https://www.emqx.com/en/mqtt/public-mqtt5-broker)
- [MQTT Test Client](https://testclient-cloud.mqtt.cool/)
